---
layout: page
sidebar: left
subheadline: 
title: "Aerial"
teaser: ""
breadcrumb: true
categories:
    - compositions
samples:
image:
    url: picture23.jpg
    title: James Reichert in the studio mixing Omniphony
    caption: James Reichert in the studio mixing Omniphony

---

I've written before of my interest in shortwave radio, in the notes to the Quatermass CD. Also, in the notes to the Omniphony CD (which has my first 'Aerial' mix, [Past Prelude]({% post_url compositions/2015-03-18-Past-Prelude %}) in it), I mentioned 'The Aerial Etudes', which was my working title for what became the three CDs you have. And, at the end of an [interview with Chris Cutler]({% post_url interviews/2002-01-01-Interview-with-Chris-Cutler %}), the piece I mentioned was starting to work on at the time became 'Aerial'.

When I was very young, people got most of their entertainment from radio. They called it 'playing the radio', as if it were a musical instrument. That's what I've tried to do in this piece.

The mixing of the work began in 1990. Before that, I'd been collecting the sound-materials from an old shortwave radio I had. I worked at night because that's when the best reception occurs; during the day, short-wave sounds are limited and scarce - at least the kind I was listening for: the kind that occur when there are so many stations on the air, they over-ride each other and something strange emerges from the conflict.

Because shortwave AM radio is of the lowest possible fidelity (little better than a telephone), I recorded on ordinary audio-cassettes. It was also for economy, because I knew I'd have to do a lot of recording to capture the momentary events I was looking for. Periodically, I would transfer the best (most potentially useful) of these recordings to quarter inch tape, turning them into 'hi-fi stereo' as I did, with a variety of techniques.

Slowly, eventually, I made a library of 72 reels of tape and 35 DAT cassettes, for a total of about 90 hours of sound. Each track was given a descriptive name, and catalogued.

I found that many of the tracks, though they were 'electronic' by nature, sounded not unlike the sounds I've used before in my work: bells, voices, drums, strings, trains, water, wind... And, in the mixing, I went for that physical sound.

I began mixing in October of 1994. For this, I had two old Ampex 2-track tape machines and two, newer, DAT decks - giving me the possibility of eight tracks of feed. (This is the same amount I had for my 'Quatermass' and 'Apocalypse' LPs.)

Everything was sent, analogue, to a third DAT: my first digital pieces (or parts of pieces). Eventually, I had 580 2-track mixes, on 16 DATs, and I was facing transferring the best of these back to analog tape, for final, physical editing - the old razor-and-splicing-tape technique, which was all I knew.

About this time, a few people encouraged me to look into using a computer for this work. I'd never used one,  but I saw it would allow me to keep my mixes digital - no more transfer losses. So, at the end of 2001, I got a computer and an editing program for it, and spent what seemed a long time learning it. I began selecting mixes and loading them into the computer in late March, 2002. Out of the 580, I selected 90 'best' mixes - eventually reduced to 59, the ones on the CDs.

I found the computer program I was using allowed me to deepen and expand the surprisingly 'acoustic' sound of many of the mixes: even 'choirs' e,erged, shouting voices, calliopes, detonations, whispers. So that the sound, as before in my work, dictated the form of each piece.

Finally, in assembling the CDs, I followed David Myers' suggestion to allow each piece to flow into the next - making a continuous journey to the end.

**Tod Dockstader**, 14 September 2003

