T od Dockstader
II Listening to rock bands has convinced me -
and I'm old
enough to have teen-aged children of my own - that we are in
the process of evolving a new kind of electronic music. II
- Ralph Gleason (in notes for the
Jefferson Airplane's first LP).
"I feel as if I was inside a song, if you take my meaning. II
- Sam Gamgee, Hobbit.
When Karlheinz Stockhausen's long piece, Kontakte, came out years ago on LP, I played it for
someone used only to popular music and got the comment it would have been a groovy thing if
all the "wandering around" could be cut out.
"Wandering around" has long been identified with electronic music. In Conversations with Igor
Stravinsky, the composer commented: liThe shortest pieces of electronic music seem endless, and
within those pieces we feel no time control." And this time-sense has, along with strange sounds,
kept electronic music from a large audience in the past. In the past, popular music - rock -
has been the opposite of both "wandering" and strange; it's always been three minutes of rigid
metrics, and unvarying dynamics and instrumentation: loud electric guitars. Yet now, just in
the past year, rock groups are beginning to not only wander around, they're making strange soft
sounds as well, and along with these new, and previously unpopular, sounds, has come a time
change: in most cases, the strangest sounding cuts on the new rock records are also the longest.
At times, even the inviolate Beat is abandoned in a timeless stream of sound.
liMy friends have lost their way.
We'll be over soon, they said -
Now they've lost themsel~es instead. II
- Beatles lyric.
It took jazz years to lose the beat and slowly disassemble into introspection. The musicians grad-
ually stopped swinging and went inside themselves; solos became longer, and both the melody
and· the beat ceased to matter much - and when the ' pulse stopped, the patient died. (You may
not agree jazz is dead, that it's still alive and living in Poland. But for me, it died when it
stopped swinging, and most of its young audience left it at that time for rock - including a
great many people who took it seriously, and now take rock seriously.) Rock, with its strong
beat and direct melody, took over the large young audience left stranded by the musicians' de-
parture for Infinity. Now something like this is starting to happen to rock - very fast. It still
holds its vast audience, but Infinity is beckoning again, this time in the form of "electronic"
sound and time. Yet, if anything does succeed in killing rock - and many futile attempts have
been made on its I ife in the past - I th'ink it will turn out to have been an overdose, not of
tape echo, but of drugs.
"O ne pill makes you larger,
JANUARY 1968
15And one pill makes you small,
And the ones that mother gives you
Don't do anything at all. II
- Jefferson Airplane lyric.
Five years ago, long before any of this happened, I was asked at the end of a radio interview if
I thought there was a similarity between the effect on the I istener of a piece of mine (Quater-
mass, Owl Records, ORLP 8) and LSD. At the time, I thought the question silly; now, I'm not
so sure. If I thought about lithe listenerll at all, it was to assume he'd gradually come around
somehow to electronic music, though it would probably take him years to do it; I never thought
he would try and catapult himself into it, because I realized some profound changes in aural o-
rientation were involved . But' the catapult is at hand:
IIlf you take the trip tonight,
Focus in on the flashing light.
Take a step right through the door -
When it's done, you'll ask for more.
You're on the one-and-only home-made time mach ine. II
- .H. P. Lovecraft lyric.
One of the few guaranteed effects of the most widely used and least exotic hallucinogen, ma-
rijuana, is an expansion of time perception - or the loss of it. Time, under the effects of pot,
seems to go on and on, and one ceases to be concerned with the lengths of th ings. A three-
minute song can go on indefinitely, and the form of the piece is lost in a slow procession of fas-
cinating detail. This detail becomes enlarged; sounds that were before almost inaudible can e-
merge abruptly from the ~ackg~o~nd and be-come startlingly clear and_present - and their identity
(as instruments), no longer automatic, now seems irrelevant. Also, these now unfami I iar sounds
can appear to come from outside the room and beh ind your head, as well as from the speakers -
a kind of super-stereo that is not always pleasant to be in. {In short, an experience not unlike
that to be had at a concert of II serious II electronic music. It should be noted now that what I
say about these drugs is not an endorsementof them; if you play with your head in this way, you
stand a real chance of losing it.) I suspect it is this composite experience, and not the influ-
ence of electronic' music per se, that has led to the sUddenly accelerated change in rock - and
it's an experience shared in part by both the musicians and their audience:
IIWhy don't we sing this song all together -
Open our heads and let the pictures come. II
- Rolling Stones lyric.
This new music began life as something calledllacid rock ll . Acid rock didn't sound very hal-
lucinated, but the lyrics began to establish the new experience:
IIRemember what the Dodo said -
Feed your head, feed your head. II
- was the final advice in the Airplane's White Rabbit. (Alice in Wonderland and J.R.R. Tol-
kien's Hobbit books have become popular sources of imageryfor rock lyricists: the Beatles' I Am
the Walrus and a new group called The Hobbits.) Some of these song titles depended ona know-
ledge of inside matters (Acapulco Gold; A Small Package of Great Value Will Come to You
Shortly}and the names of some of the groups themselves came out of drug literature - The Doors
16
ELECTRONIC MUSIC REVIEW(- of Perception; a pioneering book on hallucinogens by Aldous Huxley), Clear Light (also men-
tioned in Huxley's book) - and drug culture (Big Brother and The Holding Company, a reference
to the ever-present problem of a "stash").
The progression from acid rock to what is now being called "electronic rock" is particularly ev-
ident in the three LP's so far released by the Jefferson Airplane. Theirfirst LP was regular high-
school rock - Why-Don't-You-Love-Me-Anymore-Baby lyrics, but with more inventive instru-
mental playing and varied beat. The second LP contained the White Rabbit, which became a
hit single. The third, and latest, album is hallucinated in lyric and sound, and time. The new
time-sense sounds, in many cases, "electroni c"; the whole LP contains only five cuts, while
their earlier records had at least five on a side, and it is not always clear where one song ends
and another begins. Time goes on, unspiraled, and sometimes unmeasured by any beat at all.
One "song" (A Small Package ... ) is entirely vocal mumbling and giggling in tape echo, moving
to and fro between the speakers. (The use of tape echo exemplifies the change in rock: faint
tape reverb was common in the first days of rock recording and then abandoned; now it's reap-
peared in a more dramati c use, repeating vocal figures into infinity and pushing instrumental
sounds into a totally white-noise distortion.) In Two Heads (in this case, a "head" is a regular
user of hallucinogens) Grace Slick's voice spl its in two and goes wandering in and out of ·the
echo chambers and back and forth between channels; throughout the piece, everyth ing is in
constant motion, including the drummer.
The first electronic rock record I came across was a little-known release by a group called The
West Coast Pop Art Experimental Band. Most of the cuts on th is record were ni ce acid rock,
with love-lyrics, but two cuts contained the first (to my knowledge) examples of dis-organized
sound in rock music. (I do not include the Mothers of Invention here because their sound is
disorganized for purely anarchic reasons - intended as a kind of philosophical insult. In fact,
the very existence of this group is an insult, as their live appearances make clear.) In Leiyla
and Help, 11m a Rock the guitars were scraped and slammed~ amplifier feedback was built up
into sustained howls, and vocal growls, barks, and shrieks completed the din. "Fuzz boxes"
were used to , heavily distort the guitar sound into something like a square wave. (The fuzz box
is a kind of cI ipping ampl ifier, introduced into rock several years ago but not used until recent-
ly to achieve total distortion. } This was "performable" electronic rock in that everything could
be done live on a stage. Besides the famil)ar fuzz box, other devices came to be used to change
the sound of live performance: a pedal volume-control was used to el iminate the naturally sharp
attack of the guitar (the fuzz box also does this) and turn it into an organ-like sound. The
BluesProject had a long piece called Flute Thing in which the "electric" flute (a contact mi-
crophone was taped to it) worked through an ampl ifier and a tape-loop devi ce. The flutist con-
trolled the amount of tape echo mix with his feef (there were. two pedals, one for volume and
one for tape speed) playing a kind of duet with himself and sometimes building the tape echo up
into great burbling cascades of sound. (This piece can be heard without electronics on Projec-
tions [Verve/Forecast 3008J; without electronics, the piece is half as long and a good deal less
rambling.) Pushing guitar amplifier levels up so high that acoustic feedback loops resulted be-
came a favorite addition to the already deafening sound. ("Deafening" = a steady 120 Db,
measured in the hall.) The tremolo circuit (a blocking ampl ifier) of the-gui'tar amplifier is used
in the Rolling Stones' new LP to shake the singer's voice throughout the song In Another Land.
(This particular use is a striking example of the sudden search for new sounds on the part ofrock
musicians. The tremolo circuit has been available for years as standard equipmenton guitar am-
plifiers, yet not until this has it been used to affect anything but a guitar.)
"It's a wild time -
JANUARY 1968
1711m doing things that haven't got a name yet. II
- Jefferson Airplane lyric.
Mostof these new effects are less impressive on records than theyare in live performance. (The
popular idea that rock groups can't playa note outside of a recording studio - that they exist
only on records - falls apart when you hear them in concert. In most cases, their recordings
are a faint carbon of the hair-raising power they can achieve on stage. Rock, if you want to
listen to it at all, must be heard clean and loud, and this is hard to achieve outside of a con-
cert. You can, if you Ive never been to one of these concerts, get some idea of the sound by I is-
tening to the Clear Light's Mr. Blue through stereo headphones and a pair of clean 3D-watt am-
plifiers with the volume all the way open; at the same time, try to visualize six rather~ rancid-
looking young men on a distant stage, producing this sound with an apparent minimum of effort.
My warning about playing with your head might also apply to this experience; keep your hand
move farther into electronic-tape
sound, however, the problem
on the knob.) As these groups
-
-
of repeating a recorded performance - of living up to it - on stage will get serious. They may
have to include an engineer in the group to play tape-tracks and circuitry. More likely, they
will begin to abandon live performance altogether, as the Beatles have done, and then they will
exist only on records. I think if this happens, their audience will begin to drift away toward
other groups that still can perform their material live. Most reputations are still based on con-
certs - even in rock - and this is particularly true for new groups getting started; these new
groups may be discouraged from developing electronic rock for this reason. To a IIGroupie ll (a
rock fan) the 3-D photograph of Mick Jagger which adorns the cover of the new Stones album
just can't generate the same hysteria as being there - with Him! in the same place! - even if
the same place is Shea Stadium. And it's the Groupies, not the intellectuals (who, though they
take rock seriously, prefer not to have to look at Mick Jagger if they can possibly avoid it) who
have been keeping rock alive through all the attacks it has sustained.
The Beatles have reached the stage where they can exist only on records (and in films and TV)
and have to, because their influential ideas are now so complex they are largely unperformable.
Sgt. Pepper, their first lIacid ll LP, has been called a Complete Trip - yet I find in it little use
of what could be called truly hallucinated sound, certainly not the kind of sound in either the
Airplane's or the Stones l LP's which followed and were largely influenced by it. A Day in the
Life ends the LP with the line IIlld love to turn you on ll but the turning-on is done with straight,
though unprecedentedly complex, orchestration and tracking (building a piece like a layer cake
on eight or sixteen track tape). This song has a Wozzeckian full-orchestra effect in it which
sounds electronic, but isn't. What this LP did do was to present the work ofa rock group -work
usually divided up into singles - as a total experience. It's a vast (and expensive) show, a con-
cert for loudspeakers.
The Beatles ' newest LP, Magical Mystery Tour, has cuts in it that do use tape-sound. In Flying
and Blue Jay Way backwards vocal and instrumental tape passages are used, and in Blue Jay
Way everything is in constant phase-shift. In I Am the Walrus a complicated superheterodyne-
radio-tuning cacaphony ends the pie~e, full of inaudible voi ce fragments and other unidentified
sounds. This ending din is exactly the sort.of thing that can become unaccountably interesting
under pot; without that, it remains another example of creeping infinity.
An attempt to play infinity-rock, whi Ie keeping the beat, is Third Stone from the Sun, a long
and rambling instrumental on Jimi Hendrix's LP that uses backwards-tape rhythm and half-speed
voices growling a cosmic-air-to-ground communications IIlyric ll • This LP has the most terrifying
fuzz lIve ever heard; the guitar sound is completely destroyed by it. This kind of fuzz is also
18
ELECTRONIC MUSIC REVIEWresponsible for a powerful percussion sound in the Clear Light's Mr. Blue - it sounds like a five-
foot coiled steel spring being hit with an axe, instead of the single guitar note it is. The Beach
Boys' new LP incorporates a Theremin and tape speed acceleration, yet the overall sound of this
album (despite its Middle-Earth cover) is, to my mrnd, more Disneyland than Hobbit-land. Yet
this LP represents a schoolgirl's-world shaking change in sound for the Beach Boys • Similarly,
the Pearls Before Swine LP has a properly hallucinated cover (by Hieronymus Bosch) but the sound
inside is straight (though varied, in the acid style. One nice effect is the lead singer's speech
impediment). A sine-wave oscillator does appear in one cut, but only to dit-dah out a four-
letter synonym for passionate cohabitation in Morse code. The Doors' new LP has one cut, Horse
Latitudes, that has no beat and no melody, being entirely a mad babbJe of voices that flutter
rapidly back and forth between speakers; the declaimed lyric is an example of what heads would
call a "bummer". (Another bad-trip lyric is in the- Airplane's Rejoyce which refers, I assume, to
a famous acid incident with: "I've got his arm. I've got his arm. I've had it for weeks." This
sort of thing may indicate that the romance with drugs is about over.)
Finally, the Stones' new LP: probably the most extreme example to date of Infinity-Through-
Electronics (a correlation to the heads' Better Living Through Chemistry). This LP was influ-
enced inside and out by Sgt. Pepper. The eye-wrenching cover has the costumed group seated
in an out-of-focus 3-D landscape, with Beatles' faces hidden in the Hobbit-trees. The record,
like Sgt. Pepper, ka never-to-be-performed concert, involving complex orchestration and
tracking. Voices mumble an introduction to one song; a prepared piano (coat-hangers on the
strings), running both forwards and backwards, introduces 2000 Light Years from Home, and dur-
ing the vocal of th is song, phrases are run backwards and an oscillator burbles up and down in
variable-speed tape echo; one long cut is a kind of add-a-part chaos (Sing This All Together -
See What Happens); and the last cut on the first side is entirely electronic in both sound and
organization: waves of white noise washing up on the label.
Most of the electronic rock I've heard so far recalls the musigue concrete of the fifties. (The
all-electronic cut on the Stones' LP, for instance, is a slowed-down Christmas carol.) There is,
as yet, I ittle evidence of sophisticated generation or control of sound. There are a few efforts
being mqde outside of rock to totally synthesize the rock sound, but none of these has so far
surfaced in LP's, and the few I've heard, on tape, couldn't be said to swing. The curiously
lumpy, mechanical beat recalls the strained effort of the RCA Synthesizer to play Blue Skies.
(It conjures up a picture of a metal man you put a quarter into and his eyes light up, and after
much clanking a little metal disc comes out with your name stamped on it.) A partial attempt
at synthesis has appeared on LP, produced by a non-rock duo named Perrey-Kingsley, but they
depend on a straight (and uninspired) rhythm section of bass and drums for an inflexible beat,
and the music, despite the funny sounds, is as rigid as the earliest three-minute rock. The whole
effect sounds as forced as the titles (Jungle Blues from Jupiter; Computer in Love) and as square.
Somehow, it seems to me, totally electronic rock will have to swing on its ~ new terms, and
not as an imitative thing, as this is.
So far as I know, no one from the "serious" electronic discipline has ever worked with these
groups. (I hear that some work is going on at Columbia-Princeton Downtown [The Electric Cir-
cus] involving Morton Subotnick, and some of this work surfaced in the Circus's Electric Christ-
mas celebration at Carnegie Hall last year. But since the electronic work was accompanied by
an eye-spl itting Walpurgis light show of multiple strobes, it was hard to know at the time what
the music was doing on its own. I have the feeling, from what I heard at this concert, and from
Subotnick's LP, that he may be the first to really pull it off.) The unassisted rock groups seem
to be in the process of finding it out all over again for themselves, with the inevitable awkward-
JANUARY 1968
19nesses. But they're moving fast, and they are unhampered by the lackof money for time and e-
quipment that has plagued electronic composers in the past. (A single cut on the Beach Boys' LP
cost, in studio bookings alone, the equivalent of a fully-equipped electronic music studio for a
school.) These groups now book recording studios for months at a time - in effect, they are
"playing" the studio, and they're bound to come upon all the devi ces they need to get the sound
they want. Whether or not this ultimate sound will be all electronic., ' or wheth.er they'll begin
to find their huge audience falling behind them and retreat to the origi-na-I Beat, abandoning
everything they've picked up on in the past year - or trip on into Infinity to join the jazz mu-
sicians of the past - seemsto depend on how turned-on they, and _their audience, can remain as
both the government and old age move in on them. They have not yet developed a self-sustain-
ing form, as serious electronic music is; right now they're running on an extra-musical fuel, a
common experience that faces extinction by law.
Drugs began this new trip for rock, and enriched it by forcing open a lot of plugged young ears,
resulting in new ideas; and electronics furnished the new sounds to express these new ideas. I
don't know if this new rock can survive the inevitable withdrawal; I do know it can't survive
the withdrawal of its audience (unUke serious electronic music, which has survived two decades
with very little audience at all). These groups are playing for the heads - not, as in the past,
the feet - of their audience, and it may be I'm underestimating all those heads. I hope so.
I've liked rock for a long time, and I think the introduction of electronics into it could, by it-
self, power a great new popular music. I don't think anybOcly's truly heard this new music yet,
because nobody's succeeded yet in making a sustained original electronic rock that swings on
its own terms, and not on those of either the infinity-gropers or the electronic-pop paste-up peo-
ple who are doing it now. That it has to swing, I have no doubt. Wandering around inside a
piece of music is what I listen to (and make) electronic music for, and getting lost inside is part
of the joy of it, because there's enough time in the form to find my way out again. But rock is
short pieces of time, and a clear road ahead, and I like it for that. If electronics can build a
yellow rock road (I wonder why no one has used the Oz books for rock Iyri cs. and group names,
like "Toto and the Munchkins ll ) that's even better - but no detours; Stockhausen Builds Better
Detours.
STEREO LP DISCOGRAPHY
The Beach Boys: Smiley Smile Capito-I T -2891
The Beatles: Magical Mystery Tour Capitol MAL-2835
Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band Capitol MAS-2653
The BluesProject: Live at Town Hall Verve/Forecast 3025
Clear Light Elektra EKS-74011
The Doors: Strange Days Elektra EKS-74014
J imi Hendrix: The J imi Hendrix Experience Reprise 6261
Jefferson Airplane: After Bathing at Baxter's RCA Victor LSO-1511
Surrealistic Pillow RCA Victor LSP-3766
H.P. Lovecraft Phillips PHS-600252
Pearls Before Swine ESP 1054
Perrey-Kingsley: The In Sound from Way Out Vanguard VSD-79222
The Rolling Stones: Their Satanic Majesties Reguest London NPS-2
The United States of America Columbia CS-9614 (This LP - the first so far to be promoted
as electronic rock - was released after this article was
written. It will be reviewed in a forthcoming issue of EMR.)
The West Coast Pop Art Experimental Band - Part One Reprise 6247
20
ELECTRONIC MUSIC REVIEW