SOURCE, Issues Number One, Two, and Three. Edited by Larry Austin. (Davis,
California: Composer/Performer Edition)
Source is a twice-yearly publication of music of the avant-garde. It is
a 13^2- by 10%-inch, spiral-bound loose-leaf selection of new scores and
articles about avant-garde ("the growing edge") music. By its nature, it is
a contradiction, since the source of New Music is agreed to be sound
itself, and much of it has no score and is, in fact, unscoreable.
In the first issue composer Robert Ashley says: "We have to change
our language in order to use the paper." Source is, in a phrase, the new
language of scoring. In one word, the new language seems to be the
arrow: there are arrows all over the place, along with dots in strings,
rings, and constellations, graphs, words (only), colored spatters ("The
bass player must follow the turquoise-blue."), thickets of little numbers,
and many instructions to the effect "either-or" and "all or none."
Source's definition of a score thus has to be wide: "To us it is transcribed
information about the composer's music-making process," and it takes the
form of photographic essays as well as tape-recorded discussions and
diaries — and "scores."
"Process" is the key here: a score is a process, not an object; thought
itself, not the results of thought. Much of the music published here is, in
fact, the act of gesture — ritual theater, celebration, protest — in which
the actions of the performers are suggested, not the sounds they are to
make, much like a playscript consisting entirely of stage directions without
dialogue. Often the sounds produced are incidental, sometimes nonexistent,
as in John Cage's 4'33" (the autograph score of which is reproduced
in Source number two): six pages of silence, which in score
form is a philosophical statement, and in performance becomes a purely
theatrical gesture (not entirely nihilistic, since the performance usually is
a sound-producing event: it leads to the audience's becoming aware of
itself as a sound [cough] producing mechanism).
This kind of gesture-music, or sound theater, leads to some odd and
agonized scoring. For instance, Larry Austin's The Maze (the first score
in the first issue) contains the percussion notation: "Leave axe in stump
and walk stiffly to Wd 4 as if in daze. Arrive by 0.9." There is a great
deal of pedestrian activity in this piece, always carefully notated as
"slowly, defiantly," or "briskly and stealthily," and, clearly, anyone who
wants to walk briskly and stealthily has to work at it. Stanley Lunetta's
piano score directs the pianist to "restrict the dynamic to triple-forte" at a
point when no sound is issuing from the piano at all. "Turn this page in
anger" is another direction, and, at the end, the pianist finds he is playing
 at University of Leeds on September 24, 2015 http://mq.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from 
550 The Musical Quarterly
one note with all ten fingers, "passionately." Playing one note with ten
fingers is the general effect of much of this music — a great deal of it
devoted to nothing more than burning bridges behind and, in general, baiting
the bourgeois. One of the bridges most often set afire is time — linearity,
sequence, the basic condition of previous music.
The idea of music as space, and not time — as mass, not linearity —
permeates many of these scores and in performance results in an avalanche
of noise, or an avalanche of tedium, or both. (In spite of Marshall
McLuhan's Dictums [linearity is out, simultaneity is in] I have found
that experienced audiences will produce newspapers, magazines, and books
after about ten minutes of one of these spatial experiences and settle down in
the din to quiet, linear reading.) The struggle, then, is to fill the space,
not — as in Olde Musick — to spend the time, and this can result in
quite an accumulation of stage properties, not all of which appear in the
score. The score for The Maze represents but one-tenth of the work — the
percussion part. This tenth involves: cymbals, chimes, celeste, toy pianos,
triangles, goat bells, cowbells (seventeen tuned), vibraphone, bells, glockenspiel,
saw, sleighbells, tambourine, wind chimes, washboard, brake drum,
steel pipes and barrel, garbage can cover, coil, marimba, chair, tree
stump with axe, temple blocks, xylophone, tam-tams, piano soundingboard,
sticks, guiros, salad bowls, claves, castanets, wood blocks, large
crate, bongos, tom-toms, conga drum, bass drum, timpanos, glass pane
(with hammer), crystal glasses (tuned from fa to mi), electronic piano,
bottles, music boxes, and player piano. Not notated are six channels of
taped sound, projections (slides and films), a dancer and various pinball
machines. Obviously, the medium here is inadequate to the message.
Other composers find that they can get it all into the medium of the
score. Harry Partch's Petaluma pieces are completely notated in Source
number two, and you can — if you have an agile ear — follow the score
while listening to the CRI recording of this work (one of the few LPs
available of any Source pieces). The problem here, however, is that the
score is unperformable on any but Partch's own forty-three-tone-to-theoctave
instruments; thus a completely realizable score would have to
include several truckloads of Cloud-Chamber Bowls and Mazda Marimbas.
This leads me to finish the quotation I began with: "We have
to change our language in order to use the paper, or we have to change
the medium and not use paper." An example of changing the medium is
Alvin Lucier's score for his Music for Solo Performer 1965, a kit of
parts: wires, electrodes, electrode paste, amplifier and filter — and an instruction
manual. Although Source writes authoritatively about this piece,
 at University of Leeds on September 24, 2015 http://mq.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from 
Reviews of Books 551
it cannot — being paper — publish it. Briefly, the Solo Music calls for
tapping the alpha-wave current of the soloists' brain and using it to
power resonators around the hall. A degree of virtuosity is required in that
alpha-waves are not easy to produce on cue; you must not think in order
to produce them at all.
I happen to hold the curious belief that scores, like performances, are
of only archeological interest, and these scores seem to me to be the last,
agonized efforts to save a broken container for further use. The real value
of Source is in revealing the thinking that goes into making new music — or,
if you are still boggling at "music," sound events: Earl Brown (in Source
number one) tells what the computer really has to do with composing
music. Morton Feldman (in the second issue) says things like: "Much of
Beethoven .. . is acoustically out of control." And, if you are irritated by
Feldman's truculence, you can be taken in by Pauline Oliveros' charming
sound-diary in the third issue. These people care about music in an
original way — the way people cared about it enough to begin making it out
of two rocks — and this ingenuousness and commitment come through,
sometimes a bit self-consciously and aggressively, but mostly with honesty
and charm. Source is itself a process: the process of thinking, programming
and organizing sound as music. Sometimes it is hard to take seriously,
and some of it is not meant to be, and sometimes it is hard to take, period.
This is music climbing out of the pit and into the audience, and, if the
musicians are armed with amplified axes, it can get uncomfortable. (I was
almost impaled by a walkie-talkie antenna at the last Sonic Arts Group
concert in New York.) Many of these scores are, in Karlheinz Stockhausen's
words, "just little pictures" and not very good little pictures, either. This is
not to say, however, that they have no value. The score for 4'33" is a much
more elegant solution to the puzzle of John Cage than pages of analysis
could be.
There is a thick red line running through all these scores, in all
three issues: a new romanticism. I am sure Source would refuse my
subscription for using this term, but I can think of no other. But do not
confuse this romanticism with the "excesses of Wagner" that burnt down
Vienna. The new work is romantic in the old, forgotten, basic way: the
event, not the system, is the thing. These composers want music as
"magic" again. Although many of them are engaged in the current antihero
mystique (fostered by Hero John Cage) their work is full of personality
: grand gestures, often made in person, on stage, since so many of
them perform (or, more correctly, participate in realizing) their own
works. Rock music appeals to them strongly because rock is today's ro-
 at University of Leeds on September 24, 2015 http://mq.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from 
552 The Musical Quarterly
mantic music: it is theatrical, ritual communion; unscored, improvised,
popular. "It's beautiful because it's really aural magic . . . the music
really happens .. . it happens with ecstasy" (from the first issue of
Source). If you doubt this, witness Stockhausen's description (from the same
issue) of his feelings about music that he likes: "It's just incredible. You
get goose skin and everything. And you may cry. You fall in love. . . . This
is the first thing." And this is the value of Source: showing us Stockhausen
crying over a piece of music, falling in love with it. In this sense,
Source is what is happening, and it is a pleasure to watch it happen in
such a literate, lovely way.
The third issue of Source is the best: it contains the maximum of
words and pictures and the widest variety of scores (from scores in four
and six colors to a piece that is scored to go on for 382 years). This issue
also makes clear the connection between popular and avant-garde music:
it devotes itself to a study of groups, such as the ONCE group in Ann
Arbor and the Sonic Arts group in New York, and the in-group discussions
often read like the back-of-album statements of the more literate (or
rather, wordy) rock groups — things like:
"SPACED IN
Our music EMBRACES all within us
SPACED IN"
and
"We no longer know who we are
or what we do; we are embraced
by all without us. 'WITHIN US
WITHOUT US.' WE ARE ALL ONE."
Being All One seems to be a strong need for many of these composers.
"Groups are a necessity of life, an alternative to' being in an institution."
(Some of these pages suggest that being in one of these groups is like being
in an institution.) The Being-In insularity that this leads to is evident
in this statement: "It's rare to find a composer — at least one of our
generation — writing really significant new music but not associated and
interacting with a group of his peers." The Hero Group would seem to
be the Beatles because they are (or were) Innocent, and innocence is
necessary if you want to start all over again from the beginning. The trappings
of rock — light-shows and loud feedback — and its instrumentation
— contact microphones, kilowatt amplifiers, Voice-of-the-Theatre
loudspeakers, and hum — are much in evidence when these groups perform.
But this is not producing Creation du monde music — indeed it
 at University of Leeds on September 24, 2015 http://mq.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from 
Reviews of Books 553
seems to be going the other way: the avant-garde is influencing rock in
sound and form/lessness; rock is affecting the avant-garde only in the
socializing force of its romanticism.
The third issue contains the only manifesto I could find — and it is
relegated to the last page under "Editors' Comment." It is recommended
as a starting point in reading Source. It is short and to the point: the New
Music will be free sound-events, produced by groups, experienced rather
than listened-to. The Olde Music belongs in museums (all the Lincoln
Centers) and the old procedures that produced it are irrelevant and must
be discarded. In summary, it sounds as bumptious as most manifestos (a
polite manifesto is a contradiction), but it is really quite gentle and hopeful.
Hopefulness, gentleness, and wonder are also the qualities of Pauline
Oliveros' Sound Observations (the avant-garde is not yet beyond poor
puns) essay. It is the most accessible and beautiful composition in all three
issues. There is not a note in it (there are a few footnotes) but it reveals
the curiosity and hard-won innocence that is or should be at the beginning
of all new music, as well as the technical and political hurdles (the resistance
of circuits and administrators) in the way of realizing it, and the
good humor and pioneer sense of "family" that help you get through.
The language of this piece, as well as much of the language in
Source, may be difficult only because you may have forgotten it; it is the
primer language of listening. (Can you remember when CAT did not spell
cat, but was a new moon, the roof of a house, and a man with outstretched
arms?) When you go back to the source, you have to leave suitcase form
behind, and you are burdened again with the work of art; you will have
to work your way through these process-pieces. At the growing edge, the
frontier, there are no finished houses, only trees. If Source composers
sometimes have difficulty in finding the forest, their efforts will enable
you to rediscover the trees.
TOD DOCKSTADER