Morton Subotnick: The Wild Bull a composition for electronic-music synthesizer.
Nonesuch H-71208 (LP)
John Pfieffer: Electronomusic — Nine Images RCA Victrola VICS 1371 (LP)
In 1967, Nonesuch commissioned Silver Apples of the Moon from
Morton Subotnick and it was an unprecedented success: the reviews were
almost unanimously good and the first pressing run sold out. The Wild Bull,
the second commission, will do at least as well. Subotnick is one of the few
people working in this field — and whose work has been published —
with wit and style. His compositions have personality, and personality is
hard to extract from a synthesizer. One of the elements of this style is
what might be now called The Subotnick Beat: a very fast rhythm that
swings strongly — or perhaps it should be called The Buchla Beat. And
that is the only thing that bothers me about this work: how much is the
Machine, how much is the Man?
Subotnick's synthesizer — his basic piano — is a Buchla system.
Unlike the Moog system, which is designed to be played, the Buchla
has a sequencer at its center, and this device can be set up to produce
complex, automatic rhythms, like a syncopated motor you start up and
let run, leaving your hands free for steering and horn-sounding. I have
heard other works by other composers on this system and they had the
same beat; in fact, they all had the exact same beat, and this seems to be
the liability of the machine: it has only one throttle position — either
that, or everyone is listening to the sound of the same drummer. This is
a case of the machine influencing the music — a continuing problem in
electronic music, which depends so heavily on machinery for its composition
and performance. This sound first appeared on the second side of
Silver Apples of the Moon (where it was badly needed) and doubtless
helped the sale of these records. Knowing a good thing when they heard it
(and it ir a good thing), Nonesuch probably wanted more of the same, for
the Buchla beat also appears several times in this work. When Subotnick
has the sequencer really in hand — as he does during the great second
 at University of Leeds on September 24, 2015 http://mq.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from 
Reviews of Records 137
sequence on side two — it works wonderfully well, but at other times, it
intrudes with its almost senseless patter, like a flock of heedless children
running through a room. At present this may be only an uncorrected
fault in the machine; if however, Subotnick continues to use it in everything
he does, it will become his fault.
I first heard these rhythm tracks (pieces like this are built up in
multiple tape-track layers, like rock recording) at The Electric Circus's
Christmas celebration in Carnegie Hall in 1967. They were used to provide
a pulse for a synapse-shattering multiple strobe-light extravaganza, and at
high levels they were terrifyingly successful. Subotnick is, among other
things, The Electric Circus's director of electronic music, and I suspect this
job has influenced his work — and for the good. The Wild Bull makes use
of several rock-sound techniques: rapid regenerative-filter sweeps (which,
in rock, are produced by the homely Wah-wah pedal), heavy use of
spring-reverberation sound (Hammond "echo"), and vibrato circuits. And,
most obviously, the beat. But The Wild Bull is not rock — it is its own
thing: a strange, powerful lament, at times full of grief, at times wildly
rebellious; in short, classically tragic. Popular music has influenced Subotnick
only in its basic rebellion and its sadness — its romanticism. The
Wild Bull is serious music.
Its beat is not mindless; though it is liberating even when flying it
still is heavy with an awareness of its inevitable fall. The piece moves
from thrashing point to thrashing point with strong, direct, wailing cries,
and it does move. Unlike many electronic works, which sound like "reprocessed"
stereo, Subotnick's work has an orchestral depth and spread;
the sounds do not just ping-pong to and fro, but move in great arcs of
antiphony between the speakers. In orchestral records, this is incidental
to the work; in electronic music, it is a central part: the composer has
to create his own space as well as his own sounds. This is not easy to do,
but Subotnick does it so well it sounds effortless. The Wild Bull contains
a very wide range of voices — not just the usual sirens and beeps — and
some awesome bass surges usually lacking in most, shrill, electronic work.
Usually purely synthesized sound becomes claustrophobic in a long piece,
and one wishes for some unprogrammed sound to enter the piece and
wrench it out of the windowless, soundproofed studio into the air. But
air-moving sounds are hard to control: they are loaded with visual, social
connotations, and do not sequence automatically; they do not "compute,"
and since the present effort in electronic music is for control, and not
primarily discovery, successful composers shy away from such material.
In this piece, however, there is no such discomfort. Subotnick uses the
 at University of Leeds on September 24, 2015 http://mq.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from 
138 The Musical Quarterly
synthesizer so widely and so well, it is enough to sustain the time.
The title of this work is taken from a Sumerian poem (1700 B.C.)
which is presented on the back cover by the composer (I take it) in lieu
of the usual electromysticism. For anyone in this field to acknowledge an
extra-musical influence is rare; most electronic recording Liner notes
read like a handbook of computer programming. But all the influences —
the poem, The Circus, even the machine, mean nothing. What counts
is this lovely piece, quite different from Silver Apples of the Moon and
a great advance over that work. Silver Apples of the Moon had a lot of
pussyfoot serialism in it; it was a hedged, closed work. The Wild Bull takes
in the world outside the insulated studio, the unprogrammed world of
human predicament, in a clear and tragic vision not witnessed since Edgard
Varese's brief Poime Slectronique of ten years ago. Because Subotnick
made this record of struggle and loss, we all gain a little.
For the majority, who still consider all electronic music wild bull,
there is John Pfieffer's Nine Images which might be called tame bull. The
album notes (there are so many of them, they begin on the front cover)
are awful; after reading them through it is difficult to imagine who they
were written for. The author of the notes (and the music) seems to feel
that what electronic music needs is some more terminology: "Electronomusic,"
"Inharmonic Side-Band," "Contraformer," "Parametric Blocks,"
"Metric Transperformer" — etc., etc., and etc. "Electronomusic,"
we are told, is "a new but obvious name for musically organized sound
built from electronic technology." (What an Inharmonic Side-Band is,
we are not told. It happens to be the tape-speed switch on a tape
recorder.)
"Electronomusic" is obvious, despite the obfuscating titles; it certainly
is not new. The techniques go back twenty years to the primitivism of
the Toonerville Trolley compositions for toy-train-and-cows that came
out of France after the war. But this is not because the author became
deaf in 1950; it is because "in this age of radical avant-gardism... as
experimentalists, we can't all follow the popular routes." So the author
strikes out alone, trudging backwards into charted waters, until his lonely,
unpopular figure disappears beneath a sea of tape-echo (or, as he prefers,
Contraformer).
There are nine pieces, nine Images, on the record. The first, "WarmUp,
Canon and Peace" for Inharmonic Side-Band is Stella Dallas
for sped-up piano. The sound throughout is marvelously irritating: shrill,
tinny and fatiguing, and the piece seems to go on longer than the whole
 at University of Leeds on September 24, 2015 http://mq.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from 
Reviews of Records 139
of The Wild Bull — though it lasts, in fact, only a mere 7:28. The
second piece (for Contraformer) is Laura In Space For Muffled Piano
And Backward Violin With Tape-Echo. And so on. There are some
more "moderne" beeps (Parametric Blocks), but they have a far more
deadly effect than the most limited sequencer could produce. If you have
to play it, I suggest the last cut on side two: "After Hours" (for Ordered
Simpliformer). It, at least is intentionally funny; here the author does
for the telephone what Leroy Anderson did for the typewriter — if you
like what Leroy Anderson did for the typewriter.
Many years ago Victor brought out a record called "Classical Music
For People Who Hate Classical Music." Electronomusic might be for
People Who Hate Electronic Music. It illustrates the sort of one-finger
exercises, smothered in terminology, that are being rushed into a suddenly
expanding market. The danger is that the dross of the Electronomusics
will hide the gold of the Wild Bulls.
TOD DOCKSTADER